



Independent Submission                                      K. Makhijani
Internet-Draft                                                 Futurewei
Intended status: Informational                               18 May 2022
Expires: 19 November 2022


     Operations and Control Networks - Reference Model and Taxonomy
                      draft-km-intarea-ocn-latest

Abstract

   This text formulates a specialized network concept to support
   communication constraints in automated systems.  These specialized
   networks, called Operations and Control networks (OCN), are
   significant to many application scenarios involving the control and
   monitoring of mechanical and digital devices.  The document defines
   the OCN reference model, describing the associated components,
   interfaces, and reference points.  The generalization of OCN concepts
   and compute-intensive applications and end-machine.  The reference
   model is independent of any specific technology. standardized
   mechanisms will facilitate large-scale machine-to-machine
   communication and help with integration between

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Internet Area Working
   Group Working Group mailing list (int-area@ietf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/int-area/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/kiranmak/OCN-draft-kmak-ocn.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 19 November 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
     2.1.  Acronyms
   3.  Operation and Control Networks
     3.1.  Controller Point Interface (CP)
     3.2.  Actuation Point Interface (AP):
     3.3.  Sensor Point (SP)
   4.  Characteristics of Messages over OCNs
   5.  Northbound Application Interface
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  Acknowledgements
   9.  Informative References
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   A number of applications require specialized networks to perform
   operations (on controller devices) that change or monitor the
   behavior of equipment and the environment in which they operate.
   Such domains benefit from software-driven process automation with the
   ability to control and detect changes remotely.

   Traditionally, equipment operation is associated with factory
   automation.  However, growth in the Internet of Things (IoT) has
   broadened the scope of operations and control to support process
   automation into various market verticals and commercial applications.
   For example, it is possible to remotely control door locks at home
   and monitor visitors from the surveillance cameras.  In addition,
   process automation software will automatically detect a familiar face
   and permit entry.  In an automobile's car area network (CAN), entire
   engine operations, speed control, temperature collision detection,
   and avoidance mechanisms are performed through intelligent software
   without human-in-the-loop.  Control processes use real-time power
   consumption data inputs in large-scale power distribution systems to
   prevent power outages by performing automatic load re-distribution
   across different sub-stations.

   These scenarios have a common requirement of operating on an end-
   equipment controlled by presumably an intelligent machine.  Such
   systems vary from general purpose networks in many ways.  Their
   requirements for a reliable network, latency, packet loss, and real-
   time delivery are precise, and traffic patterns are well defined.
   Their tolerance to failures is extremely low.  Those failures can
   lead to halting the process and unpredictable behavior causing a loss
   in production, inability to develop the product in compliance with
   its specification, road collisions, etc.  Moreover, computing is a
   critical part of modern industrial automation or IoT operation.
   Combining general purpose compute-centric networks with highly-
   precise operations networks requires devising new standard mechanisms
   in networks serving process automation scenarios.

   An Operation and Control Network (OCN) is the interconnection of
   field devices (actuators, sensors) and their associated controllers
   to exchange data to cause and monitor changes to the end-equipment.
   Each OCN connection is designed or provisioned to fulfill the traffic
   characteristics with stringent time and reliability constraints such
   as protecting bounded latency and not allowing packet losses.

   OCN, itself is not a new concept.  Other industrial network
   technologies that would be classified as OCN are available, albeit
   with limited functionalities and at a smaller scale.  However,
   process automation is growing across diverse applications and use
   cases, and a broader, more generalized approach is needed.  OCN
   integrates factory equipment or automation infrastructure beyond a
   single location to other locations and even the cloud; it
   additionally integrates existing industrial network technologies.
   OCN aims to formalize the mechanisms for interaction between the OCN
   components.

   The rest of the document represents the OCN taxonomy and a detail
   description of OCN concepts.

2.  Terminology

   *  Operational technology (OT): Programmable systems or devices that
      interact with the physical environment (or manage devices that
      interact with the physical environment).  These systems/devices
      detect or cause a direct change through the monitoring and/or
      control of devices, processes, and events.  Examples include
      industrial control systems, building management systems, fire
      control systems, and physical access control mechanisms.  Source:
      NIST

   *  Industry Automation: Mechanisms that enable the machine-to-machine
      communication by use of technologies that enable automatic control
      and operation of industrial devices and processes leading to
      minimizing human intervention.

   *  Control Loop: Control loops are part of process control systems in
      with desired process response is provided as an input to the
      controller, which performs the corresponding action (using
      actuators) and reads the output values.  Since no error correction
      is performed, these are called open control loops.

   *  Feedback Control Loop: Feedback control loop is a system in which
      the output of a control system is continuously measured and
      compared to the input reference value.  The controller uses any
      deviation from the input value to adjust the output value for the
      desired response.  Since there is a feedback of error signal to
      the input, these are called closed control loops.

   *  Industrial Control Networks: The industrial control networks are
      interconnection of equipments used for the operation, control or
      monitoring of machines in the industry environment.  It involves
      different level of communications - between fieldbus devices,
      digital controllers and software applications

   *  Human Machine Interface: An interface between the operator and the
      machine.  The communication interface relays I/O data back and
      forth between an operator's terminal anf HMI software to control
      and monitor equipment.

2.1.  Acronyms

   *  HMI: Human Machine Interface

   *  OCN: Operations and Control Networks

3.  Operation and Control Networks

   Definition:

      An Operation and Control Network (OCN) supports all the
      capabilities necessary to accomplish a process or control command
      execution on actuators for the desired effect prescribed by the
      controllers based on continuous inputs from the sensory data and
      application requests.

   An Operation and Control Network (OCN) connects field devices, and
   their associated controllers for the exchange of data to trigger and
   monitor changes to achieve desired effect.

   The key functional components of OCN are field devices and
   controllers.  These terms are well-known in the industry control
   systems and are now extended to newer scenarios of autonomous driving
   systems or home IoT.  The field devices are characterized as sensors
   and actuators and are associated with physical or logical entity that
   can be observed, monitored, or caused to move or change.  In the
   scope of this document, field devices have broader meaning than
   Internet of Things (IoT) since all the field devices may or may not
   be directly connected to the network.  For example legacy fieldbus
   devices that are connected to a PLC through serial-bus and interface
   over the network through those PLCs.  Sensors are devices that
   respond to a physical (such as heat, light, sound, pressure,
   magnetism, or a particular motion) or digital (software errors or
   thresholds) change and report measured values.

      Note: the term "OCN field device" will be used to represent
      actuator and sensors together.

   A related well-known term is Operational Technology (OT).
   Traditional OT related networks are engineered over limited distance
   in a specific area; In contrast, OCN extends OT connectivity
   logically which may flexibly beyond factory premises covering cloud
   and edge scenarios in which components are disaggregated or are not
   collocated.

      Note: TODO: Service objectives are wider - be specific to what OT
      need.  Clarify traffic profile.

   OCN enables different types of messages over these interfaces.  The
   message data sent from controller to actuator is smaller than typical
   network payload.  However, the packet must not be dropped or lost by
   the network, therefore, packet delivery is guaranteed by the OCN.
   Similarly sensory data itself may also be small but is emitted from
   several sources with a fixed frequency.  Many processes feedback
   mechanisms with actuators and sensors by continuous monitoring of
   output data from these two types of devices.

   The characteristics of these messages is covered in
   Section Section 4.  OCNs will serve different applications and the
   most common attribute among them is safety of operations.  Safety
   implies several things - that the requested operation or a control
   command was executed as instructed without any adverse impact to the
   mechanical equipment or the environment.

   The traffic originating from change is triggered through commands
   delivered to actuator and the same device or different sensor Each
   OCN connection is designed or provisioned to fulfill the traffic-
   characteristics with stringent quality of services.

      Note: Suggestions on naming anything is OK.  I am not happy with
      any of these names.  Note 2: Do we really need sensor and actuator
      interface separate.  Can they not be merged?

               +----------+ +---------+
               | Actuator | | Sensor  |
               +---^------+ +-----^---+
                   |              |
                   |AP            | SP
               +---v--------------v-----+
               | Operations & Control   |
               |       Network (OCN)    |
               +-----------^------------+
                           | CP
                   +-------v------+
                   | Controller   |
                   |   Access     |
                   +--------------+
                         ^
                         | Northbound interface to controller
                         V
                   ---------------
                   Applications
                   -------------

       Figure 1: Operations & Control Networks(OCN) - Reference Model

   An 'operation' in OCN is a process of accessing information from the
   field-sensors, writing command data, and reading it back from the
   actuators.  Figure above is a reference model for OCN.  An
   application executes operation on field-devices over OCN to monitor
   specific and/or overall state of the system; An operation may involve
   realizing feedback control loop between the controller, actuating and
   sensory devices.  The procedures for integration of controller and
   field devices with the application are not in the scope of this
   document.

   OCN Reference model is extended to accommodate a variety of access
   networks.  In fact, it serves as convergent network to integrate
   communication across different technology specific networks.
   Consider it as a specialized shared network infrastructure that
   interconnects different other OT-enabled access networks.  Some of
   the examples of OT-enabled networks are Ethernet/IP, Profinet, TSN
   [TSNTG], Detnet[DETNET-ARCH], 5G radio, private 5G, etc.  As is
   implied that each of these technologies are by themselves capable of
   supporting several properties of OCN.  However, all of them are
   representative of a single access network instance.  It is

   A generalized OCN model supports (or requires) the following
   interfaces:

3.1.  Controller Point Interface (CP)

   A controller point interfaces with the OCN for accessing sensors and
   actuators.  The controller network has visibility into application-
   specific performance or KPIs.  These are expressed in terms of
   network resources for example tolerance to packet loss, latency-
   limits, jitter variance, bandwidth, and description of safety.  Such
   capabilities maybe exposed from OCN over COI, to allow applications
   in controller access networks to have a broader knowledge about the
   OCN.  Since OCNs maybe shared among different applications, each with
   different KPI values for the same resource, a controller interface is
   used to express specific requirements towards OCN.

   A key property of controller network is that it is already integrated
   with the IT infrastructure and presumably an integration point for
   translating higher-level business intelligence into operational
   actions.

   In most cases, the controller networks initiate and request
   connectivity towards the field device networks (i.e., it is unlikely
   that sensors will volunteer connection towards the controller unless
   it is restoration of a disrupted traffic flow).  Note: 22.804 uses
   terms as dependable communication and communication function.
   Controller OCN Interface is required to support traffic profiles with
   time constraints for both periodic and asynchronous communications.

3.2.  Actuation Point Interface (AP):

   An actuation interface is used for communication between the
   actuation access network parts and the OCN.  The OCN enables control
   of actuating devices remotely from controller networks by meeting all
   the demands of commands requested by controller.  The actuator
   interface opaquely enables, closed control loop over OCN for a
   distributed application.  The network requirement specification will
   be applied between the controller network interface over COI and
   actuator Interface AOI.  Only the verified messages will be delivered
   to the end-device through AOP.  It may be worth considering that AOI
   may interface directly with SOI where application demands such
   communication with the OCN-attributed provided by controller.

   Actuation OCN Interface is required to support traffic profiles with
   time constraints for both periodic and asynchronous communications.

3.3.  Sensor Point (SP)

   The sensor point's main function is to emit periodic data from the
   sensors.  It may intermittently provide asynchronous readings upon
   request from the controller.

   A sensor interface is used for communication between the sensor point
   and the OCN.  The OCN enables delivery of data emitted from sensor
   devices to the controller networks by meeting all the application
   demands requested by controller.  Optionally, the sensor interface
   may enable, closed control loop with AOI over OCN for a distributed
   application.  The network requirement specification will be applied
   between the COI and AOI.  Only the verified messages will be
   delivered to the end-device through AOP.  It may be worth considering
   that AOI may interface directly with SOI where application demands
   such communication with the OCN-attributed provided by controller.

   Sensor OCN Interface is expected to emit more data periodically as
   per the requested periodicity.  It supports largely periodic but
   asynchronous communications as well.

4.  Characteristics of Messages over OCNs

   The interfaces carry specific type of messages and are described as
   follows: ## In-time messages: ## On-time messages

5.  Northbound Application Interface

   An application domain is a group of actuators, sensors and
   controller.  The application domain will inclue access domains and be
   interconnected using OCN.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions from IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new security issues.

8.  Acknowledgements

9.  Informative References

   [DETNET-ARCH]
              Finn, N., Thubert, P., Varga, B., and J. Farkas,
              "Deterministic Networking Architecture", RFC 8655,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8655, October 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8655>.

   [DETNET-DP]
              Varga, B., Ed., Farkas, J., Berger, L., Fedyk, D., and S.
              Bryant, "Deterministic Networking (DetNet) Data Plane:
              IP", RFC 8939, DOI 10.17487/RFC8939, November 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8939>.

   [TSNTG]    "IEEE, "Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) Task Group"",
              2018, <https://1.ieee802.org/tsn>.

Author's Address

   Kiran Makhijani
   Futurewei
   Email: kiran.ietf@gmail.com
